WkExp 903 Assignment
To many, engineering is strictly about math, science, and design. What's often forgotten, however, is the softer side of the profession; interpersonal skills, public speaking, and leadership are arguably just as important to an engineer as strong analytical skills. Due to the scientific and social nature of the profession—engineering links scientific study to real-life application, and thus has a direct impact on human life—ethical concerns often come into play, sometimes to the chagrin of engineers and businesspeople alike.
To ensure the engineering profession maintains a standard of excellence and a high degree of respect from the public, practicing engineers must be licenced and adhere to a set of guidelines that ensure that they practice ethically. In this province, the Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Alberta (APEGA) is tasked with setting the standard and establishing the guidelines that all engineers must follow. In the case of a violation of APEGA's code of ethics, the Association holds the authority to discipline the offender. Some of APEGA's primary goals are to ensure accountability, good faith, and professional practice among its members.
This paper aims to examine a situation that presents an ethical dilemma, and, through the use of critical thinking and guided by APEGA's Guideline for Ethical Practice, find an appropriate solution. The dilemma concerns a situation in which an individual requests information on behalf of another without realizing that it is proprietary material. The situation is as follows:
Smoinky, a purveyor of fine smoked pork products, has need of a custom-made shaft collar for one of their industrial-sized smokers. The engineer who designed it specified some very precisely controlled dimensions on the drawing. The simplest method of producing the part is to machine it to a preliminary set of dimensions, split it into two halves, and then heat-treat it according to the specification called out on the engineering drawing. A vendor on Mars, Parts "R" Us, has been awarded a contract to manufacture the component.
Unfortunately for Parts "R" Us, it is found during assembly that the part that they supplied fits too loosely for its intended purpose. Blame is not assigned to the Martian vendor because the part passed all of the necessary inspection procedures. In fact, fault lies with a poorly thought-out quality control request on the drawing which directs the manufacturer to supply a certificate of dimensional conformance before splitting the workpiece. Of course, this request fails to consider the possibility of the part warping, either while it is being split or during the finalizing heat treatment process. Clearly, since the part passes inspection but fails during assembly, warping must occur during one of these last two steps.
Although they are not technically at fault for the part's failure, arrangements are made to stop purchasing from Parts "R" us because they have shown that they are incapable of manufacturing the piece correctly. Meanwhile, another vendor called Hephaestus Machine, headquartered on the Moon, regularly supplies parts that conform to the requirements.
In order to reduce losses and maintain a good business relationship with Smoinky, Parts "R" Us would like to remedy the situation as quickly as possible. Glorpn, a representative of the Martian company contacts an intermediary, who works at Smoinky, with a few questions. One of these questions concerns what process is used to control the undesirable deformation that occurs during the manufacturing process. The intermediary, who doesn't have the technical knowledge to answer Glorpn's question, forwards the email to Victor, an engineer who also works at Smoinky.
From Victor's point of view, he is simply receiving an email from another trusted employee, nothing out of the ordinary. However, upon closer inspection, he realizes that Glorpn is unintentionally requesting proprietary information that is the rightful intellectual property of Hephaestus Machine. Victor replies to the email, answering the questions that he is able to, and explains to Glorpn that he cannot, in good faith, answer any questions regarding deformation-control processes. As a result, Parts "R" Us is charged with the burden of determining their own process. If necessary, they will need to consult another firm to assist them with developing a method to control deformation.
In the end, Parts "R" Us eventually succeeds in manufacturing parts that conform to the engineering drawing's specifications, and the business relationship between Smoinky and Parts "R" Us perseveres.
Why did Victor respond in this way? In order to answer this question, it is important to note that Victor is a maintenance engineer who works with repair and maintenance (R&M) procedures for Smoinky's pork smokers. He does not specialize in manufacturing, and does not presently have the expertise or the experience to develop specialized manufacturing methods. He does, however, have specific knowledge of Hephaestus Machine's specialized warp-control method, and could easily provide Parts "R" Us with the information that they desire, although he had no part in the development of that specific process. Were he to help develop a manufacturing method for the struggling machine shop, he would, in all likelihood, be providing an unfair advantage to one of Hephaestus's competitors by divulging proprietary information. If Victor did help Parts "R" Us, he could not claim that his knowledge of Hephaestus's specialized process was part of his personal engineering experience, as he has little to no personal experience developing manufacturing methods, and he had no part in its development.  As a result, Victor is unable to assist Parts "R" Us with their manufacturing issue, and doing so would most likely lead to multiple violations of the APEGA Code of Ethics.
"Rule 2 – Competence and Knowledge", found in section 4.2 of APEGA's Guideline for Ethical Practice, states: "Professional engineers and geoscientists shall undertake only work that they are competent to perform by virtue of their training and experience." Victor's participation, despite his lack of experience and training in manufacturing engineering, would clearly have been a violation of this rule. Further, section 4.2.5, "Engaging Experts", states that "Professionals should engage [...] other experts and specialists whenever the clients' [...] interests are best served by such service." With respect to the warp-control process, if he wishes to assist Parts "R" Us while also acting ethically, Victor must recommend the services of a qualified expert.
Additionally, "Rule 3 – Integrity, Honesty, Fairness and Objectivity", of section 4.3 states that "Professional engineers and geoscientists shall conduct themselves with integrity, honesty, fairness and objectivity in their professional activities." More specifically, section 4.3.3, "Maintaining Confidentiality", states that "Professionals should keep confidential all information that is acquired in the course of their professional duties and that concerns the business affairs of present or past clients/employers." It also states that "Process information [...] received during professional service should be considered the exclusive property of its owner and should not be disclosed to others except with the owner's specific approval." The Guideline explicitly states that Victor may not reveal Hephaestus Machine's special process without their express approval.
"Extraordinary circumstances may arise, for example, when consulting geoscientists are approached by a second client to work on a play where they have already worked for another client, or when a consulting engineer is approached separately by two parties competing on a proposed project. [...] In such cases, the professional should first use judgement to decide that the second assignment can be fulfilled using his or her general professional knowledge, without being influenced by the first assignment."
Here, Victor's judgement should bring him to the conclusion that he cannot assist Parts "R" Us "without being influenced by the first assignment" (the "first assignment" being his experience with Hephaestus) as stated above.
Section 4.3.3 states that "Technical knowledge gained by an individual through exposure to the work environment is part of the professional's experience and may be freely used in subsequent projects without consent from other parties." Victor might be tempted to say that his knowledge of Hephaestus' process falls under the category of his professional experience. Unfortunately, this argument is inadequate, as Victor had no part in the development of the warp-control process, thus he has no right to claim that that experience is his own.
Although Victor's situation appeared to be a straightforward question from a coworker, upon closer inspection it turned out to be a far more interesting ethical dilemma.
References
APEGA
Ethical issues in engineering design: safety and sustainability http://ethicsandtechnology.eu/projects/ethical_issues_in_engineering_design_safety_and_sustainabillity/